So what we're going to cover in this
session is I'm going to explain
why psychology is so important to
encouraging people to take action.
We're going to look at doc patterns and
what they are, exactly.
Then we're going to look at warning
dark patterns or a bad idea, okay?
And then we're going to look at four
psychological principles that you can use
without starting to get into dark
patterns and those kinds of things.
Because the problem with something
like nudge is that it can begin to get
a little bit manipulative
if you're not too careful.
So you need to think very carefully about
the techniques and how you use them and
when you use.
So, why talk about psychology?
Why is this such an important subject
when it comes to decision making and
acting on websites?
Well I'm sorry to break it to you but you
are not as logical as you think you are.
We like to all think of ourselves as
Vulcans right that when we're presented
with a decision we weigh the pros and cons
and we make a logical decision over it.
Unfortunately nothing could
be further from the truth.
Most of the decisions that we make
are instinctive, intuitive decisions.
And also we don't even structure
the world around us in
a logical way okay let me give
you a very simple example right.
Where did the tomatoes
belong in a supermarket?
Right, if you are logical they belong in
the fruits right, in the fruit aisle.
And that's because tomatoes
are fruits okay but
we always put them in the salad aisle.
Why did we do?
That's not logical what we do it
because our procedural knowledge
are kind of the way that we think of
using tomatoes is as part of a salad.
So therefore it should
sit in the salad aisle.
But actually that's not logical and
we make lots of decisions all the time
based around our mental model,
how we see the world.
And how we organize
information within the world.
And we'll get into that in a little
bit more in a few minutes time.
But the first thing to know is that most
of our decision making is emotional,
right?
So we have a primal brain.
Now our primal brain is
the oldest part of our brain.
It's our brainstem.
It's often called the lizard brain.
And it's the the kind of survival
instinct part of our brain.
And it handles things like aggression and
fear the flight and fight response.
And this is a critical part of
our decision making process.
So if you've ever been to a website
that uses techniques like fear, right.
Fear of missing out, fear of
something going wrong that is really
it's using psychological
manipulation to encourage you to
make a decision to act and
it's playing off of that primal brain.
Equally if you go to a website and
it plays off of scarcity right?
So this is gonna run out soon again
that's manipulating your primal
brain that likes to hoard and
keep things to itself.
So these kinds of fundamental
manipulative techniques
are targeting your primal brain.
But the primal brain
presents some problems for
those of us that want to encourage
people to act ethically as well.
The primal brain, for example,
likes to hoard things.
So it doesn't like to give up stuff like
paying money for something or it doesn't
like to hand over personal information
because it's afraid of what will happen.
So our primal brain lives in this
kind of constant state of looking for
dangers and risks.
It's all of the time.
It's the bit that kept us alive in
the savannahs of Africa because it was
looking for
movement that might be some saber toothed
tiger that was gonna rip us apart, right?
So, we need to understand the primal brain
and understand how to calm it, okay?
To enable us to encourage
people to take action.
So, there's one little bit of
psychology you need to understand.
So, remember the primal brain.
We'll be coming back to that later.
Another kind of part of psychology
that's really important to decide
is that we make the majority of our
decisions subconsciously, right?
So it might be that you're sitting
here watching this course at home, and
you've just picked up
from beside you a drink.
You probably picked up your drink.
You took a sip and you put it down again.
Right now, you didn't think about
that you didn't go, I'm thirsty.
I therefore need a drink,
there is a drink beside me.
I'm going to pick it up and
I'm going to drink it, right?
You didn't think that you did
it entirely instinctively.
And so
many of our decisions are done like that.
And it comes down to what is
called system one and system two.
So, earlier I mentioned a book
called thinking fast thinking slow,
where he introduces this concept
of system one and system.
It's a really useful
concept to understand.
So system one,
is the kinda fast automatic,
intuitive emotional mode of thinking.
So the majority of decisions like
whether to take a drink is being
made automatically by system one,
all the time, right?
So for example, if I said to you,
what's 2+2, right?
You don't have to think about that, you
just remember that the answer is 4, okay?
It's intuitive quick unconscious
reaction to that particular statement.
So that's system one.
And then there is system two.
Now system two is our conscious brain.
It's the slower, more effortful,
more deliberate part of our brain.
So it's the part of our brain that
we make conscious decisions with.
But while system one is effortless,
system two takes effort and
it's limited, it gets tired and
depleted very easily.
And I can give you a real world
example of this where you will
have personally experienced this.
So those of you that have that
have learned to drive at least
when you first learned to drive,
it was hard work, wasn't it?
There was loads of things to think about.
You have to, check your mirrors,
you had to look at oncoming traffic,
you had to steer.
If you were in Europe,
you had to change gear.
You had to deal with all these different
pedals indicators, all the rest of it.
It was overwhelming, right?
And you'd have to do all of that was
system to because it was a new thing and
it was effortful.
And you'd be exhausted by the time
you've finished a driving lesson.
Now skip on a few years when you've
been driving regularly especially if
you've been doing a commute
between home and work.
Did you ever have those days where you'd
get to work and go, how did I get here?
I've got no memory of
the journey whatsoever.
Well that's because system
one has taken over that job.
You've become so accustomed to do it
that is become a subconscious thing.
So we're gonna talk more about system one
and two throughout this entire course.
So just keep it in mind system
one is your subconscious,
effortless, easy and automatic thinking.
System two is your conscious mind and
it takes a lot more effort.
And related to that is another aspect of
psychology that you need to be aware of,
which is that we are inherently
lazy thinkers, right.
So this is evolution for you evolution
believes in using the minimal
amount of effort possible
to achieve results.
Now, we've already said that system
one requires a lot less effort than
system two.
So we, tend to favor that over
system one because a sorry,
we favor system one over system two,
if that makes sense.
So let me give you a real world example
of where this can become a problem.
So, if I asked you what the chances are of
your favorite football team going on to
win the cup next year, right.
Obviously I'm talking about English
football, boat, American football,
it doesn't really matter.
So that's a complicated
question to answer, isn't it?
There were many different factors
that would determine whether or
not a team was successful
as you buy the competition.
How well they were performing,
whether he had injuries,
there are many, many different things
that could get in the way that
make it hard to answer whether or
not that that is likely to happen.
Now you could, if you were completely
logical and you were a system two thinker.
All the way you could go and
do your research and
you could look at the probabilities and
work it all out.
And make an informed answer to my
question, chances are mind you're not
going to do that you're not gonna
do it because we are lazy thinkers.
Instead, you're going to rely on system
one to answer that question, right?
And system one is going to
go with a gut reaction,
a visceral reaction of whether
they you think it's likely or not.
And that will be based on your
own bias towards your team.
And also,
towards what the current situation is.
If there's currently one of your
team members, that are injured,
you might reduce the probability slightly.
If you've been doing really
well in recent games,
you might increase
the probability slightly.
But you'll give it a gut reaction rather
than a really well considered response.
You're just kind of guessing at it.
And obviously you can see how this
starts to apply to the decision making
that we're making about whether to
sign up to a product or not, or
whether a product is good, right?
If you haven't heard of a product very
much, your system one might conclude,
well, it's not a very good product, right?
So there are all kinds of different
factors playing here, but
the thing that I want you to take
away is that we're inherently lazy.
We like to not have to think, right.
There's a really famous book by an author
called Steve Krug called don't make me
think, right.
Which is a book about
usability testing and
improving the usability
of your website and
if you've never read don't make me think I
highly recommend getting yourself a copy.
It's really short, really easy to read.
And you can probably read
it in a single sitting.
And the premise of the book is in
the title don't make me think.
So one of the best things that we can do
is reduce the amount that people think on
a website.
We'll come back to that later as well.
So those are some of the kind
of fundamental principles of
psychology that I need you to
kind of hold in your brain.
The fact that we're in heresy lazy,
the fact that we
favor system one over system two and
the difference between those two.
And the fact that we're very
influenced by our primal brain,
the oldest part of our brain.
We need to be aware of these
things as we go about designing
a website and
creating a value proposition for
a product or a service and
all of those kinds of things.